---
layout: post
category: tomatomountain
---

i've been reading lucy lippard's Overlay, which i became aware of through the jb blunk monograph i recently acquired, and as a result i've been thinking about art in the landscape. of course there's always the argument that that landscape itself is the art, but my interest in this moment lies with the human-made monument meant to communicate something otherwise incommunicable. the closest thing to a monument i could think of locally was a rock labyrinth i visited with someone recently on a cliff in the headlands. last i visited it was with a much more experienced cyclist so i thought it would be a great opportunity to kill a couple'a birds with one stone: practice riding on some more technical terrain than i'm used to alone, and get to peep some cool art. 

with all that in mind i threw together some lunch, grabbed a camping chair, my nice camera, and let some air out of my tires. i cruised through the presidio to the bridge and worked halfway up hawk hill to the trailhead. the basket loaded up with a couple of things definitely made a difference  in how the bike rode, so i was a bit nervous for the loose gravel sections on the downhill to the headlands. thankfully i didn't see any of the forewarned men or equipment working.

i definitely did drift a bit on some segments but not too bad. i paused to let some horses go past. they looked lovely with their hair braided. further down i slid out to avoid rolling over some lizards mid-fuck, and looked back to find them in the same place stock-still. 

down into the valley the landscape opens up like a painting. 

it was there that i saw this mass of organic matter covered by a sheet of plastic. i'm not sure what it's for exactly, if it's to help what's underneath decompose or whatever, but it was a striking presence in the landscape. i mused about this being the actual "land art" i've been seeking, and what the difference-makers really are. maybe it's more of a land readymade. then—another seemed to appear. 

from the masses of matter i rode to the battery townsley looney toons cannon and knew i was close to my destination, having traveled around 12 miles from home and about a thousand feet high. the hills were green and animals were plenty. pipevine swallowtails were fluttering around all over the trails. 

i finally descended on the labyrinth and sat down to eat and relax a bit in my chair. 

an eerie feeling sunk in. recognizing that this was a relatively new installation made me long for something older and more megalithic. i took my nice camera out to snap a few photos and it immediately died, which i read in a symbolic sort of way. would this monument persist a hundred years? would it stand even fifty? or twenty?

after eating lunch i did walk it, which took a bit longer than expected, and at the center i was greeted with a few sweet mementos but also trash. i felt a bit sick seeing memorial stones and general litter heaped up together on such a special overlook. not exactly the transporting experience i had hoped for. i packed my stuff back up and headed home, more motivated than ever to see something truly ancient. 
 
bus stop